.\" vim:set tw=72 noet:
.\" Bulleted paragraph
.de bP
.ie n  .IP \(bu 4
.el    .IP \(bu 2
..
.
.TH VT240 "1" "April 2025" "DEC VT240" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
vt240 \- DEC VT240 terminal emulator
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vt240
[\fI\,OPTION\/\fR]... [\fB\,\-l\fR | \fB\-s\fR \fIcommand\fR |
\fB\-t\fR \fIhostname\fR \fIport\/\fR]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
The \fBvt240\fR program is a GPU accelerated terminal emulator which
emulates the DEC VT240 terminal with reasonable accuracy.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR
display a short help message and exit.
.TP
\fB\-g\fR
disable glow post-processing effect.
.TP
\fB\-cg\fR
set monochrome screen color to green.
.TP
\fB\-cw\fR
set monochrome screen color to white.
.TP
\fB\-ca\fR
set monochrome screen color to amber.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR \fI0.75\fR
set the electron beam focus. The focus has to be greater than zero. A
focus below 1.0 makes the beam wider, a focus greater than 1.0 makes the
beam smaller.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR \fI1.0\fR
set the electron beam intensity (brightness). This value has to be
greater than zero.
.TP
\fB\-a\fR \fI0.0\fR
set the phosphor afterglow time constant. A value of zero means no
afterglow is applied. The bigger the value, the longer it takes for a
pixel to fade to black.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR
enables raw mode, which disables all post-processing. This option also
implies \fB\-g\fR.
.TP
\fB\-u\fR
enables unlimited FPS mode. If this option is not set, then an automatic
frame limiter will limit the FPS to 60 if more than 240 FPS are rendered
otherwise. This seems to be necessary for NVIDIA T4 graphics cards.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR
enables local mode, which redirects all input to the screen. This is
equivalent of connecting the RX pin to the TX pin on a real VT240
terminal.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR \fI/bin/sh\fR
execute the program \fI/bin/sh\fR in the terminal emulator.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR \fIhost\fR \fIport\fR
connect to the TELNET server at \fIhost\fR:\fIport\fR.
.
.
.PP
If no option is provided, \fB\-s $(getent passwd $UID | cut \-d:
\-f7)\fR is assumed, which means the user's default shell is started.
.
.PP
When a program is run with \fB\-s\fR, the \fBTERM\fR environment
variable is set to \fBvt220\fR. If the \fBLANG\fR environment variable
is set to an UTF-8 locale, it is reset to \fBLANG=C\fR to avoid display
problems.
.
.SH KEYBOARD
A DEC VT240 does not have all the keys you usually find on a PC keyboard
and some keys have a very different meaning. In particular, the function
keys F1-F5 are \[lq]local\[rq] keys which configure the terminal and have no
associated sequence that could be sent to the host.
.PP
The VT240 emulator uses the following key map for local keys:
.bP
F2 = toggle fullscreen
.bP
F3 = setup
.bP
F5 = exit the terminal emulator
.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by unknown.
.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
To report rendering glitches, general bugs, and deviations from the real
DEC VT240's behaivor, use the issue tracker at
.UR https://github.com/unknown-technologies/vt240
.UE
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.MR xterm 1 ,
.MR telnet 1
